- Welcome to The Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science
and science-based tools
for everyday life.
[energetic rock music]
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of
neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today I have the pleasure of
introducing Dr. Craig Heller
as my guest on The Huberman Lab Podcast.
Dr. Heller is a professor of biology
and neurosciences at Stanford.
His laboratory works on a range of topics,
including thermoregulation, down syndrome,
and circadian rhythms.
Today we talk about thermoregulation,
how the body heats and cools itself,
and maintains what we call homeostasis,
which is an equilibrium of processes
that keeps our neurons healthy,
our organs functioning well.
And as Dr. Heller teaches us,
thermoregulation could
be leveraged in order
to greatly increase our performance
in athletics and mental
performance as well.
Learning to control your
core body temperature
is one of the most,
if not the most powerful
thing that you can do
to optimize mental and
physical performance,
regardless of the
environment that you're in.
He also dispels many
common myths about heating
and cooling the body,
including the idea that putting
a cold pack on your head
or neck is the optimal
way to cool down quickly.
And in fact,
as Dr Heller tells us, it
actually can be counterproductive,
and lead to hyperthermia.
It's a fascinating conversation
from which I learned
a tremendous amount of new information,
and we didn't even get into
the other incredibly interesting
work that Dr. Heller does
on down syndrome and
circadian rhythms and sleep.
So we hope to have him back in the future
to discuss those topics.
As you'll soon see,
Dr. Heller is a wealth of knowledge
on all things human physiology,
biology, and human performance.
It's no surprise then that he's been chair
of the biology department
at Stanford for many years,
as well as director of
the human biology program.
So if you're interested
in human biology and how
to improve your performance in any context
or setting, athletic or otherwise,
I think you'll very much
enjoy today's conversation.
Before we begin,
I'd like to emphasize that
this podcast is separate
from my teaching and
research roles at Stanford.
It is, however,
part of my desire and
effort to bring zero cost
to consumer information about science
and science-related tools
to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the
sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is ROKA.
ROKA makes sunglasses and eyeglasses
that are of the absolute highest quality.
I've spent a lifetime
working on the visual system
and I can tell you that the
visual system has to go through
a lot of work in order to main clarity
of what you see when there are shadows,
when you go into different
types of indoor lighting,
and so on,
and a lot of glasses don't work
well because you put them on
and then you're in bright
light and you can see fine,
but then you move into a
shadow and then you have
to take them off and they don't adjust,
or they don't adjust quickly enough.
With ROKA, their eyeglasses
and sunglasses are designed
with the visual system biology in mind.
So you always see things
with perfect clarity.
The glasses are also terrific,
because they're very lightweight
and they won't slip off your
face if you're exercising,
if you're running or biking.
In fact, they were
designed for the purpose
of being able to be worn
while you're engaging in
those sorts of activities,
or simply working at your desk.
I happen to wear readers
at night when I drive
or when I work and I
love their sunglasses,
'cause I can wear them anywhere.
And also the aesthetics
of their sunglasses
and eyeglasses are terrific.
Unlike a lot of other performance glasses
that frankly make people
look like cyborgs,
the aesthetics on ROKAs
are really terrific.
You could wear them
anywhere you'd like to go.
If you'd like to try RAOKA
glasses, you can go to ROKA.com.
That's R-O-K-A.com,
and enter the code HUBERMAN
to save 20% off your first order.
That's ROKA, R-O-K-A.com.
Enter the code HUBERMAN at checkout.
Today's podcast is also
brought to us by InsideTracker.
InsideTracker is a
personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood
and DNA to help you better
understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I'm a big believer in getting
regular blood work done.
And now with the advent
of modern DNA tests,
you can also analyze your
DNA to see what you ought
to be doing for your
immediate and longterm health.
We hear a lot these
days about optimization,
optimizing hormones,
optimizing your metabolism,
optimizing this, optimizing that,
but unless you know the
measurements of metabolic factors,
hormones, and other things
that are in your blood and DNA,
you don't know what to optimize.
With InsideTracker, it
makes all of that very easy.
They can come to your house to
take the blood and DNA test,
or you can go to a nearby clinic.
They send you the information
and you take those results.
And unlike a lot of laboratories
doing blood work out there
and DNA tests, they
have a simple platform,
a dashboard that walks
you through your results
and helps you identify what sorts
of nutritional or
behavioral or other types
of practices you might want
to incorporate into your life
in order to positively
impact your immediate
and longterm health.
It's a very easy system to use,
and you will gain a ton
of information simply
by doing that test,
whether or not you end up making changes
to what you're doing or not.
If you'd like to try InsideTracker,
you can go to insidetracker.com/huberman
to get 25% off any
of InsideTracker's plans.
Just use the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's episode is also brought
to us by Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is an all-in-one vitamin,
mineral, probiotic drink.
I've been using Athletic
Greens since 2012.
So I'm delighted that they're
sponsoring the podcast.
The reason I started using Athletic Greens
and the reason I still
take Athletic Greens once
or twice a day is because it covers all
of my nutritional bases.
In fact, if people asked
me, and I often am asked,
what supplements should I take?
I always recommend Athletic Greens.
And in fact, if you were to
take just one supplement,
I recommend Athletic Greens
for the simple reason
that the vitamins,
minerals, and probiotics,
and adaptogens cover all
your nutritional bases.
And the probiotics
optimize gut-brain health,
which we now know is essential for mood,
for immune system function,
for metabolic function.
It's just got so many
great things in there.
I really do feel better
when I'm drinking my Athletic Greens.
I mix mine up with some water,
a little bit of lemon juice.
And as I mentioned before,
I'll drink it once or twice a day.
If I travel, I might even
drink it a third time,
just because of the additional
stress on my mind and body.
If you'd like to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman
to claim a special offer.
They'll give you five free travel packs.
So these little travel packs
that make it really easy
to mix up athletic greens
if you're on the plane or in the car.
And they'll give you a year's
supply of vitamin D3K2.
There is now ample
evidence that vitamin D3K2
is supportive of the
immune system and a bunch
of other biological functions
and K2 has been shown
to be important for cardiovascular health.
So again, if you go to
athleticgreens.com/huberman,
you'll get the Athletic Greens,
the five free travel packs
and the year's supply
of vitamin D3K2.
And now for my discussion
with Dr. Craig Heller.
Great to have you here.
- It's good to be here.
- Yeah. It's been a long time coming.
I know that I and many people have a lot
of questions about the use of cold.
So one of the things that's
happened in recent years
is that for many reasons,
people have become interested
in things like taking cold showers
and taking ice baths for
many different purposes.
Sometimes this is introduced
as just a general health tonic,
but other times people
get specific about how
it can improve resilience
or it can improve one's metabolism.
Could you just tell me a little bit about
what happens when I get into
a cold shower or an ice bath?
What are some of the basic responses
at the level of metabolism?
Obviously psychologically,
we don't know exactly.
It'll vary from person to person,
but what happens when I
submerge myself into an ice bath
if I've never done it before?
- Well, first of all, you
get a tremendous shock.
And what that's going to translate into
is a bit of a shot of adrenaline.
And I think this is really
the so-called benefit,
but I wouldn't call it a
benefit, of the cryo chambers.
You go into a cryo
chamber and it's a shock.
So you get a shot of adrenaline. So, sure.
You're going to feel
different when you come out.
You've had a shot of adrenaline.
But it doesn't necessarily
translate into any benefit
in terms of your physiology
or performance, and so forth.
Now if you take a cold
bath or a cold shower,
a couple of things are happening.
One is you're going to
stimulate vasoconstriction.
So if anything,
it's going to make it a
little bit more difficult
for your body to get rid of heat,
because you're shutting off
your avenues of heat loss.
If you're in a true cold bath,
the overall surface area
of your body is so great
that it doesn't matter if
you're vasoconstricted,
you're still going to lose heat.
- Okay, so vasoconstriction,
the constriction of,
is it capillaries, vessels
and arteries all constrict
or just one or two?
- Well, this is an area of controversy.
In general, when people
talk of vasoconstriction,
they talk of the overall skin
surface, and that is not true.
The primary sites of heat loss,
which we're going to get into,
are the palms of your hands,
the soles of your feet, and
the upper part of your face.
And the reason these are
avenues for heat loss
is they're underlain by
special blood vessels.
And these blood vessels
are able to shunt the blood
from the arteries, which
are coming from the heart,
directly to the veins,
which are returning to the heart,
and bypassing the capillaries,
which are the nutritive
vessels, but high resistance.
So you can tell when
you shake someone's hand
what his or her thermal status is.
The hand's hot or it's cold.
- Do you think that's part of the reason
why humans evolved this
practice of shaking hands?
[Craig chuckles]
Assessing each other's level of anxiety?
We all know that a limp
shake is pretty indicative
of something and a firm handshake
is indicatives of something,
as is the crushing handshake
for that matter, right?
- Yeah, I really don't know
what the evolutionary origin
of handshaking is, other
than to get your hand away
from your weapon, [chuckles] perhaps.
- Right, a couple of questions
before we get into these
specialized vascular compartments
on the soles, the palms
and the upper face.
You mentioned whole body immersion,
like into an ice bath or very
cold water up to the neck
versus a cold shower.
Is there something fundamentally
different about those two,
besides the fact that they both provide
their release of adrenaline?
Is there anything that's really important
to understand about the difference
in the physiological response evoked
by cold shower versus immersion in cold?
- Well, there are differences
that are more physical
than anything else.
So if you are in a cold
bath and you're still,
you develop a boundary layer.
If you're in a shower,
you can't develop a boundary layer.
- Could you explain what
a boundary layer is?
- Yes, it's best to explain it in terms
of a hot bath, 'cause
everybody's experienced that.
You get into a hot bath and, oh my God,
it's really hot, almost painful.
And then you sit down and
eventually it doesn't feel
so hot anymore, because the still water,
which is close to your skin,
is coming into equilibrium with your skin.
So it's like having a blanket
on you or an insulator on you.
And then if you move around,
you disturb that still water layer.
You feel the hot temperature again.
- I see, so if I were to
get into a cold ice bath
or very cold body of water
of some kind and stay still,
I'd likely feel warmer at least until I-
- You're not going to
be losing as much heat.
- I see.
- Right.
- And then when I move in-
- If you flail around,
if you flail around, then
you're going to lose more heat.
- Got it.
- Yeah.
But I think getting back
to your original question about benefits,
you have to keep in mind
whether you're talking
about aerobic activity
or anaerobic activity,
if you're referring to
performance and exercise,
and so forth.
So if you're doing aerobic activity
that you can sustain for a long time,
your production of heat
is rising gradually
and is being distributed
throughout your body.
So eventually your body
temperature is going to come up
to a level that's going to
impair your performance.
So the benefit of a cold
bath or a cold shower
before aerobic activity
is that you increase
the capacity of your body mass
to absorb that excess heat.
- I see, so could you say that,
in a rough sense, that a
protocol that one might use
if they're going to
head out for a long run?
- Yep.
- Even on a reasonably
warm day, not super hot,
or maybe it is super hot,
would be to take a cool
shower before they go run.
Would that be beneficial?
- Sure, it'll take them longer to get
to the sweat point and to heat up.
- And what will that translate to in terms
of a performance benefit?
- Well, could increase your speed,
or it depends on how you use that benefit.
Some people are pacers.
They will go at the same pace
and then they will go farther.
Or some people are,
I'm going to say pacers
and regulators and, no, no.
Pacers or forcers.
They will take that
advantage and use it up
as fast as they can.
So they will go faster, but
not necessarily farther.
- I see, as far as I
know, not many athletes,
at least not the ones that I know,
are getting into cool bodies of water,
taking cold showers before
they head out to train.
But it sounds like there could be
a real performance benefit there.
- It could be a benefit.
I know we're going to
talk about our technology
for cooling, but at one point our,
I don't know if they're using it now,
but our cross-country team,
when they would go to
compete in a very hot place,
they would do their warm-up
exercises, their stretching.
Then they would extract heat
before the beginning of the race.
So I like to think of it
as you have greater scope
for heat absorption.
- Interesting, about
how long would one need
to take one of these showers
or cold immersions before
heading out for a run?
Roughly speaking, we don't
have to get into details,
because everyone's performance level
and regimen is going to be different,
where they live is going
to be different, et cetera.
- It's not as long as
you think. It's minutes.
- Couple minutes?
- Yeah.
Because what's going to happen is
as your core temperature goes down,
you will eventually
shut off your heat loss.
And that keeps it from going below normal.
So if you've warmed up
and your temperature
has risen by half a degree,
let's say, it doesn't take
more than a few minutes
to extract that heat
if you're vasodilated.
- Interesting, and what about
for the anaerobic athlete?
The strength athlete.
- Right.
For the anaerobic athlete,
and let's say
they're doing several
sets and how many reps,
whatever they're doing,
their core temperature's
not going to rise that fast,
because it's only certain
muscles which are being used,
but the temperature of
those muscles will go up.
- So it's a local effect.
- It's a local effect, right.
- Okay.
So let's say, for sake of today,
maybe for this discussion,
if we assume that the basic workout,
even though people do variation on this is
5 sets of 5 or 10 sets of 10.
So for those listening,
it would be 5 sets of
10 of 5 rep repetitions,
or 10 sets of 10 repetitions,
10 by 10, 5 by 5.
Yeah, so if somebody, let's say,
is doing a large body compound movement,
like barbell squats where
there are a lot of large body movements,
hip hinging, et cetera.
But for instance,
the biceps are not, they're involved,
but more or less indirectly.
- Right.
- So the effect is going to
be to heat up the quadriceps,
heat up the hamstrings,
heat up the glutes,
this kind of thing.
- Right.
- I see.
- And then during rest, that
heat will leave the muscle,
but it's not fast.
And certainly the heat can't
leave the muscle very fast
while you're working out, because
when the muscle contracts,
it squeezes the blood vessels.
And the only way heat gets out
of a muscle is in the blood.
And your muscle metabolism can go up 50
or 60-fold during anaerobic activity.
That means the heat production
in the muscle goes up 50
or 60-fold.
The blood flow to that
muscle cannot go up 50
or 60-fold.
So you literally have the
capacity to cook your muscles.
[Craig chuckles]
- So this is probably an appropriate time
to just mention briefly what
the underlying mechanism
of this is.
We will return to the
specifics of what one can do
to mitigate this heating up,
but could you just
explain the relationship
between energy production ATP
and pyruvate kinase and
the role of heat there?
- Sure. We don't get
something for nothing.
So like a steam engine,
most of the energy in
our food is lost as heat.
So we are roughly about 20% efficient.
So of the energy that
we take in in our food,
about 20% of that can go into doing work,
and the rest of it is lost as heat.
Now we're mammals.
We use that heat to keep our
body temperature considerably
above the environment.
But if you raise body
temperature a few degrees higher,
you're in trouble, that's hyperthermia.
So individual muscles can
reach hyperthermic limits
before you might experience
it in the whole body.
So to keep you from damaging
your muscle by hyperthermia,
we have fail-safe mechanisms.
And one of those fail-safe
mechanisms is an enzyme
which is critical for getting fuel.
In other words, the results
of metabolism of glucose,
getting that fuel into the mitochondria,
which is making our major coinage
of energy exchange, ATP, okay?
So that particular enzyme
is temperature-sensitive.
So when the muscle temperature
gets above 39 or 39.5,
it shuts off.
And that essentially
shuts off the fuel supply
to the mitochondria.
That's when you cannot do one more rep.
- So failure, could we say that-
- Muscle failure.
- One component of muscular failure
is overheating of the muscle locally?
- Right.
- There're probably
other things too.
- Well, if you, yeah, if you lack oxygen,
but our oxygen delivery is pretty good
to the muscle.
If you run out of glucose, yeah.
That's going to impair you.
But the most immediate,
the most immediate impairment
of muscle activity,
muscle fatigue, in other words,
is the rise in temperature of the muscle.
- Interesting, I want to talk about how
that muscle fails locally,
but I have this burning
question in my mind
that I cannot seem to answer for myself.
I'm hoping you can answer it for me.
So let's say I'm doing five
sets of five with squats.
I hit fit muscular
failure at a given weight.
And according to what I now know,
it's my quadriceps and
the muscles associated,
I mean, with the squat that have failed
because of this heat triggering,
this mechanism triggered by
heat that shuts off the muscle.
But my biceps are nice and
cool, you're telling me.
They're not doing too much
work. It's only indirect work.
So why is it that I can't set
the bar down in the squat rack,
walk over and do barbell curls
with the same intensity that I could
if I were to do those barbell curls fresh,
not having done anything prior?
- Well, you will still
have a fatigue curve
with your upper body, okay?
And that will be influenced by any rise
in temperature that has been generated
by your lower body exercise.
- So temperature in both
cases is the limiting factor?
- It's one limiting factor.
It's one limiting factor.
- I find that amazing.
I find that amazing because
I always thought naively
that the reason muscles fail
is because, quote, don't have the strength
to do another repetition.
That you lack glycogen or some ability
to access that glycogen.
But of course, we still have glycogen.
It's naive for me to think that,
because if I wait three
minutes and go back,
I can do those repetitions again.
So the glycogen wasn't
restored in that three minutes,
obviously it was there.
- Right.
- So I realized there might
be other mechanisms involved.
Sounds like heat is, if
not the dominant mechanism
that prevents more work.
It's one of them.
- It's one of them. And it's a quick one.
It's a fast one.
So it can happen with,
let's say you are a really
experienced weightlifter, okay?
You may be doing very,
very high weights with
sets of five or six.
- Yeah, to be clear for the audience,
I'm not doing very high weights
for sets of five. [chuckles]
[Craig laughs]
I'm not particularly strong.
I'm not super weak,
but I'm not particularly strong,
but Craig's referring, in
the general sense, to you.
So why is it that if I
finish a set of squats,
I can't simply cool off
my quadriceps by throwing
a nice cool towel on my quadriceps.
Why is that not the
best way to go about it?
- Because your body surface
is a very good insulator.
Okay, we think we don't have fur,
and therefore we're not insulated,
but the skin, the fascia,
the muscles underneath,
they're all very good insulators.
And that's why I said earlier
that the way the heat gets out
of the muscle is in the blood.
- So I want to step through
a couple other portals
by which one might think that heating
and cooling would be ideal.
And then get back to these.
- Sure.
- Specialized surfaces on the
hands, the feet and the face.
- [Craig] Yeah.
- So if throwing a cold towel or
even ice cold towel on my quadriceps
isn't going to work or
standing in front of the fan,
because I'm insulated from that cool,
I can't cool off my blood fast enough.
What about drinking 16
ounces of ice water?
- Sure. You can do that.
But you can calculate how much
heat that can absorb, okay?
And you can't continue
drinking liters of ice water.
You're going to dilute your
blood and have other problems.
But yes, it'll help. Sure, it will help.
But it doesn't have the
full capacity you will need.
- What about an ice pack
to the back of my neck
or to my head or squeezing
the cold sponge over the head?
I'm deliberately moving
through these options,
because these are the ones
that we see most often.
We were actually just
watching the Olympic track
and field trials last night up in Oregon.
I'm a huge track and field fan.
And there were a lot
of sponges on the backs
of necks before, in
between, and after events.
And how good is that
or how poor is that as a strategy?
Since now we know that
being overheated locally
and systemically throughout the body
is a serious limiting
factor on performance.
- Well, you have to understand something
about our thermoregulatory system.
We have a thermostat
just like you have a
thermostat in your house.
And that thermostat is in the brain, okay?
- Do we know the specific site?
- Yes.
- It's called the preoptic
interior hypothalamus.
It does many things in terms
of physiological regulation,
but it serves as a thermostat.
Now that thermostat has
to have information.
It has to have input. Where
does that input come from?
It comes from our overall body surface
where we sense temperature, okay?
So one of the things that can
happen when you're overheated
is that you can send in a cold
stimulus to your thermostat
and that sort of like wanting
to cool your house by putting
a wet washcloth over your thermostat,
it's doing the wrong thing.
So we've actually had experiences
where we've had people exercising,
getting overheated, and then
cooling the body surface,
and they say it feels great.
This is fantastic. And their
core temperature is going up.
- Well, I think this is
such an important point.
First of all, I was weaned in a laboratory
where there were always
battles over the temperature
in the lab.
So people were always putting
ice packs on thermostats
or putting fans towards thermostats
and trying to play this game.
Good to know we were all being foolish,
even though we were neurobiologists.
Putting a cold towel over
my torso or putting ice
on the back of my upper back,
you're saying could
actually heat up my core?
- It'll at least decrease your heat loss,
your rate of heat loss as
you're going to raise the
issue a little later, I know,
and that is our natural
portals for heat loss.
So you can think of the natural portals
for heat loss as our
air conditioners, okay?
The thermostats in the
brain and the information
to the thermostat is coming
from the overall body surface.
So what can happen if you, let's say,
cool the torso with an ice vest,
you can actually cause
vasoconstriction of your portals,
your heat loss portals.
So that's what impairs the rate
at which you're losing heat.
It feels good.
Now back to the head,
that's really interesting.
The major blood flow to the brain comes up
four arteries through the neck.
There's the carotid arteries
and there's the vertebral arteries.
So when you put a cold
towel around the neck,
you're going to be putting a
cold stimulus into the brain.
And that's great for protecting the brain.
You want to protect the brain,
but it's also going to make
you feel cooler than you are.
So you will think you're
ready to go again quickly
when you've just essentially
cooled the thermostat.
- This is an important point.
And there's a lot of interest nowadays,
and people doing marathons,
and even some people do
these ultras, ultra running,
which I guess is everything
longer than a marathon.
And last man standing, last man,
last woman standing kind of things.
So you're saying that if
somebody's hyperthermic,
they could trick themselves
into subjectively thinking
that they are cooling
off by putting a towel
and that they can go further,
but their brain could cook?
- Well, if they stop the cooling,
then that hot blood from the body core
is going to go to the brain.
- Interesting, well,
it's a bit of a tangent,
but many people report after
long bouts of exercise,
or even just very intense
bouts of exercise,
feeling a kind of brain
fog or mental fatigue.
I assumed that that was due
to lowered brain
oxygenation post-exercise,
but is it possible that there
is some post-exercise effects
on heating and cooling of the brain
that might impact cognition,
or I should say negatively
impact cognition?
- It's certainly possible
because we know that
rise in temperature
decreases cognitive capacity.
I mean, you can experience that yourself.
You can get on a treadmill,
and follow your temperature,
and then just do a simple activity
like adding and subtracting.
You get to about 39 degrees,
you can't do that anymore.
You can't just calculate
how long you've been on the treadmill.
- So the phrase cool,
calm and collected is-
- Cool, calm and collected.
- That's the goal
in all pursuits.
- That's right.
- So I want to talk about these portals,
because you've mentioned them a few times.
Before I ask about what
the portals are exactly
and how they work
and how they can be
leveraged for performance,
there's a question that
my neurobiologist self
can't resist, but ask.
We have this thermostat
in the preoptic area
of the hypothalamus,
which is interesting to me,
the medial preoptic area
is also one that's known
to be sexually dimorphic,
depending on testosterone
exposure early in life,
or et cetera.
Although people should just note that
it's not actually testosterone
that creates these sexual
dimorphism, these differences.
Actually testosterone
converted into estrogen.
It's actually estrogen is the effector,
which is fascinating.
Nonetheless, we've got this
area that acts as a thermostat.
And you said it's collecting information
from the whole body.
Does that mean that there are pathways,
as the neuroscientists like
you and I refer to them,
as these afferent or input
pathways from the body
to the preoptic area,
is there a map of our
body in the preoptic area?
'Cause I have to imagine
that you can't have
the information just coming
from the left shoulder,
just from the right toe.
It sounds like you need a pretty,
probably a pretty crude map,
but that you need a complete
map of the body surface there.
- Well, you don't need a
complete map in the hypothalamus.
I mean, that thermal afferent information
that you've mentioned,
it also goes to the somatosensory cortex.
So you know if an ice cube
has touched you on the back,
but that doesn't necessarily
translate into a change in,
let's say you're shivering or sweating.
So the information that's
going to the hypothalamus
is more integrated representation
of body temperature.
- So it's sort of an average of
what's happening-
- It's an average.
- Across the body.
So if I were to, let's
say I get hot on a hot day
and Popsicles, when we
were in summer camp,
I went to a sports camp
near here actually,
and we'd run around like crazy.
And then we'd get into
the shade if we could,
but we were, Popsicles.
It was all about Popsicles.
- Brain freeze.
- Or the kids were putting ice cubes
down each other's shirts or something.
But that's an average,
because other parts of
the body aren't exposed,
the mouth is exposed to the
ice in the Popsicle case
or the cold cubes are in the hands.
As you said, it feels really good.
- It feels good. Yeah.
- But it sounds like it
feels deceptively good,
because in reality could still
be quite warm internally.
- Absolutely. Yeah.
- Interesting.
- Yeah.
You can feel great and have
a dangerously hyperthermic temperature,
but I should say that when
you get into the danger zone,
things get bad fast.
- What are some of the
symptoms that people could be
on the lookout for for hyperthermia?
- Essentially, it's almost ironic that
if individuals are
transitioning into heat stroke,
they actually vasoconstrict
and they stop sweating.
And that's a pathological situation.
I couldn't begin to explain it.
But essentially you are
just feeling exhausted.
You're feeling miserable.
The heart rate is very high.
Your heart rate goes up as
your core temperature goes up,
called cardiac drift.
So you just feel rotten.
But that's why since
it's not a danger signal that
you can translate immediately
into, oop, I'm going into heat stroke,
that's why people can
overcome their bad feeling
with motivation to continue
going, to work harder.
So there've been a number of
high profile athletic deaths
due to heat stroke that
were during practice.
Not in competition when people
are really trying to do it,
but in practice,
which shows they were
just motivated to push.
- So let's talk about
these magnificent portals
that not just humans,
but other animals,
mammals are equipped with.
So if putting cold on
the neck or on the head
or on the torso is not optimal,
what is optimal?
And maybe walk us through a theory as
to why we would have these
portals located where they are.
And then we can talk about how one
might leverage them for performance.
- Okay, where the portals
are, are in the glabrous skin,
big word, okay?
Glabrous just means no hair.
So it's the hairless skin.
You say, well,
most of my body is without hair.
No, most of your body has hair follicles.
We are mammals, mammals have fur.
We've lost the fur,
but we still have that
hairy skin phenotype
all over our body, except,
except for those skin surfaces
where our mammal
relatives didn't have fur.
So the pads of the feet.
And for the primates,
upper part of the face.
For rabbits, no portions of the ears,
the inner surfaces of the ears-
- Ah, never thought about that.
For bears, the tongue.
Bears have big tongues,
huge tongues. [chuckles]
- I didn't know that either.
I haven't been that close to a bear yet.
- Haven't had a leaking match with a bear.
- Not yet. No.
- So anyway, our mammalian
relatives can't lose heat
over their overall body surface.
So probably very early on
in mammalian evolution,
they evolved these special blood vessels
in the limited surface
areas that don't have fur.
And as I said, what
these blood vessels are
are shunts between the
arteries and the veins.
Arteries and veins are both
low resistance vessels.
So you can have high flow rate.
Capillaries, which normally
are between arteries
and veins are high resistance
because they're very tiny, okay?
- Is it fair to say that
what I was taught is that blood flows
from arteries, then to capillaries,
and then to veins, and
then back to the heart.
So it's sort of like from
the heart through arteries,
then through these little capillaries,
which are like little
estuaries and streams and then
to the veins, back to the heart.
Is that generally true?
- Yeah, absolutely.
- Okay, so what I learned in
basic physiology is still?
- Is still-
- I wouldn't get an F in your class?
- No.
- Maybe a D or C,
but not F.
- So that's excellent.
- Okay.
And so you're saying that in this glabrous
or beneath the glabrous skin.
- There are these shunts.
- And those go directly
from arteries to veins?
So you skip the
capillaries-
- Capillaries, yep.
- And is it actually,
as long as I'm, say that in the skin,
when I feel the pads of my hands,
how deep to the surface
do these vessels reside?
- They're below the,
obviously the epidermis.
So if you are warm and you look
at the palms of your hands,
they are fairly red and the
backs of your hands aren't.
You don't have these vessels
in the backs of your hands.
Now if you take a glass,
like a water tumbler, right?
And you grab it, you can see
if you squeeze a little bit,
the hand goes white.
That's because you've
shut off that blood flow.
- Oh, interesting. I'm going to
do that little home experiment.
- So if you're bicycling on a hot day,
you don't want to to be grabbing
your handlebars all the time.
You want to periodically. [chuckles]
- Well, this is important.
I know you're privy to
some really amazing results
that we're going to talk about,
but I actually heard you say this
during this lecture
recently that Stanford held
about human performance
that we were both part of.
And you mentioned this,
that if you're cycling
and you're working hard
and you want to be able to do more work,
we now know why you want to
remain cool in order to continue
to do work, and if you get too warm,
that's bad, that gripping
the handlebars too tightly
will actually limit your performance.
- Right.
- And that's probably
also true on the Peloton
or any other kind of device or the skier
or anything like that.
- Right.
- So loosen the grip,
or if you safely can,
you want to actually expose
your hands to the world?
Now what about for people wearing gloves?
What about the,
to me that just seems crazy based
on everything you're telling me.
- Well, gloves definitely
impede heat loss from the hands,
just as socks impede heat
loss from the feet, okay?
So if you want to maximize your heat loss,
you want to have as thinner
protectors as possible
on your hands.
And of course the feet
are more problematical,
because you have to be
using them in certain ways.
- Some people run barefoot.
- Yeah. Well, yeah.
- Yeah.
That's become somewhat popular.
It seems like it kind of came and went.
They had those toe shoes things,
but they looked so ridiculous
that I think most people
just were willing to take
the performance hindrance
of regular shoes.
- Actually we had a track
coach here at Stanford
who for a while was famous
for introducing training
without shoes, running.
- Interesting.
- And he thought it was
because it changed the posture
of the runner.
And I think it was just due to the fact
that he was increasing the capacity
of his runners to lose heat.
- Interesting, yeah, so heating up
at the level of the hands obviously
is going to hinder performance.
So how about with running?
I noticed, I ran cross country
briefly in high school,
and not particularly well at that,
but that we were told to run as
if we were holding crackers
in our fingers or something
like very lightly,
and to keep hands kind of loose.
So running like this would actually
be more beneficial performance
than, or gripping a phone,
which is probably what most people
are doing nowadays, right?
- Right.
- Interesting and-
- Once, I'll tell you a
experience I had once.
I was in Alaska
in the winter and I went out running
and I absentmindedly forgot gloves.
And I realized this after
a short period running,
because the backs of my hands
were aching from the cold,
the palms of my hands were
sweating and were hot.
- Oh, amazing. Amazing.
So these compartments are a real thing.
And you mentioned the
upper half of the face-
- The upper part, that's
where our primate ancestors
don't have fur.
- And the bottoms of our feet.
So let's just take a
moment and talk about some
of the more amazing results
that have been associated
with proper cooling of these
glabrous skin surfaces.
- Let me introduce one more thing.
- Sure.
- Because you asked earlier
about the pouring of
water on the head, okay?
One of the things which
is not appreciated fully
is that the blood
which is perfusing these
special blood vessels
in the face above the beard line,
that's the non-hairy skin,
that blood then returns in the
venous supply to the heart,
but it actually does it
in a very strange way.
It actually goes through what are called,
I'm blocking on the name now.
- Take your time.
- These are blood vessels that
go through the skull, okay?
And that's why the scalp bleeds a lot
if you cut the scalp.
And these blood vessels which are called,
I want to say emergent,
but it's not emergent.
It's a word that means leaving.
These blood vessels were primarily thought
to be ways that blood
is leaving the brain.
But when you're overheated,
the direction of flow in
those blood vessels reverses.
So the cool blood that's coming
from your facial region goes
into that circulation and actually
is a cooling source for the brain.
So you can cool the brain.
You can have a cooling effect on the brain
by pouring water on your head.
- Interesting, so that practice,
which we, at least for me,
I most commonly associate
with combat sports,
where the fighter goes to their corner.
They usually sit down on a stool,
unless they're trying to
do some mental warfare
from the corner, in which case,
they don't even take a seat.
And their corner crew
will squeeze a glove, excuse me,
a sponge full of cold water over them,
that you're saying is somewhat effective
in cooling the brain?
- Yeah, it's one of the natural mechanisms
for cooling the brain.
- I want to return to this
at some point as well,
but is there any known
benefit to cooling the brain
in terms of offsetting physical damage,
offsetting the negative
effects of concussion.
Because one of the reasons why fighters
will often get, on the back,
a cold item on the back of the neck
or on the head is not
just to cool them down,
but the theory is that
it might offset some
of the damage of neurons.
- I just can't comment on that.
I'm aware of those ideas,
but they're controversial.
One of the things that
you want to do for injury
to the brain is to decrease swelling.
And one of the ways that
you decrease swelling
in many parts of the body is to cool.
It decreases inflammation.
It decreases the blood flow.
So I think it's a really interesting topic
and it's something that
should be investigated.
It's kind of hard to investigate.
- Yeah, interesting. Okay.
So I hear these stories.
And I've seen the data.
So I believe the stories.
Maybe tell us a story about
an observation that your group
has made with respect
to anaerobic exercise
and proper cooling of
these glabrous surfaces.
And we can talk about the technology.
Maybe give us the dips example first.
- Okay.
- So of course,
I think most people
are familiar with dips.
You're supposed to, I guess-
- Raise and lower your body.
- Yeah, raise and lower your body,
raise and lower your body mass usually
with your legs dangling down.
Sometimes people strong enough
to attach a weight there
and they'll do, it's essentially
a compound upper body exercise.
- Right.
- One dip would not be
particularly impressive
for most people.
100 would be very impressive.
20 would be impressive
for some, et cetera.
What happens when a skilled
athlete comes in and does dips
for multiple sets.
And then what happens when
they cool properly using
the glabrous skin surface?
- This was a story that occurred early on
in our investigations
when we first made the
discoveries that cooling has
a benefit to increase your work volume,
your capacity to do more reps, okay?
So the word got over, I think,
to the 49ers camp.
And one of their players, Greg Clark,
who was a tight end at the time.
He had been tight end at Stanford.
He decided, or I don't
know if he was asked,
or what, to come over and check it out.
So Greg came over and we said,
"Greg, what are you good at?
What activity do you like to do?"
He said, "Dips.
I can do a lot of dips.
I can do 40 dips in a first set.
And I can probably do five sets.
That's a usual workout for me."
And we said okay.
So he came over to the gym one day
and that's exactly what he did.
He did 40 dips the first set,
and then maybe 25 and 15 and down, down-
- Do you recall roughly what kind
of rest periods he was
taking between sets?
- Yeah, we standardized the
rest period to three minutes,
because that's what we had set
on for cooling as the injure-
- That's a good long rest period.
- Yeah. It is.
- It's still a lot dips.
- Yeah, it's actually a longer rest period
than many people would
prefer during workouts.
They want to make the most of the time-
- Not me. I prefer to take as much rest
as I possibly can, yeah.
- So several days later he
came back and his first set,
he did, I think, maybe
42, a little bit better,
but now people were standing
around and watching.
So there was a little
impetus there to show off.
So then his second set was,
I don't remember the numbers,
but very much above the
second set on the control day.
This was after we cooled his-
- Okay, so when is he doing the cooling?
- He's sitting down and putting his hands
in the devices that we had built,
which were cooling the palms of hands.
- For how long does that cooling take?
Can he do it inside of a
three-minute rest period?
- Yeah, that's what we were doing.
We standardized the interval
for resting or cooling
to three minutes, okay.
But the point is he got to his fifth set
and all of the sets were above
what he had done on the previous day.
And he said, "I'm not tired.
I can do another set."
And then I can do another set.
I can do another set.
So from one day to two or
three days later with cooling,
he doubled the total work volume.
He doubled the total number of dips.
- By adding more sets and
more repetitions to each set?
- Right, so then he kept coming
back for four more weeks,
twice a week.
And by the end of that month,
he was doing 300 dips.
- Wow. So what percent-
- So he tripled.
- He tripled.
- Tripled, and so here
is a professional athlete
at peak physical conditioning,
and he triples what he can do.
- Amazing, and in terms
of his ability to recover,
was that explored or discussed at all?
Because my understanding is
that if we cause enough stress
to a muscle during anaerobic training,
we provide the stimulus
for compensatory regrowth,
et cetera, but if we do more work,
we essentially scale up
the amount of recovery
that's needed or the recovery time.
I'm very curious about whether
or not he needed longer
to recover between these
super-performing workouts?
- That's very interesting.
That was a major discovery,
which we didn't realize we
were making at the time.
There is this phenomenon
you're referring to
as delayed onset muscle soreness, DOMS.
And this is due to those little
micro tares, and so forth,
that are happening as we extend
our workout capacity volume, okay?
So we've had this experience
so many times that an athlete
or anyone will come in to
the lab and they will exceed
what their previous goals were,
their previous expectations.
And I can always see the words
coming out of their mouth,
"I'm going to be so sore tomorrow."
They never are.
- Interesting.
- And we've actually demonstrated
that with a naive group.
We had a class, a physical
conditioning class.
And we had half of the, the
first days of the class,
we had to establish their true
capacity, what they could do.
So these were pretty heavy
workouts for these new recruits.
And we gave half of them the benefit
of cooling and the other half not.
And then we had them record
their subjective levels
of delayed onset muscle soreness.
And those that were cool,
didn't have significant muscle soreness.
- Amazing, and I know there
are also published results,
and we will provide links to some
of these papers for people
seeing similar effects,
I should say, similar
performance enhancing effects,
using bench presses, the
bench press, or pushups,
or other sorts of things.
Maybe you could give us
an example from the realm
of endurance work or aerobic
work, running, cycling,
things of that sort.
- Well, one of the problems with,
for us, is that our equipment
now is not really portable.
I mean, it's portable in
the sense that you can carry
it to the gym or to the football field.
- But you're not going
to run or run with it.
to run with it, right.
- Or equip a bicycle with it.
Although when are the cooling
handles on bicycles coming?
- That would be good,
but one itinerant activity is golfing.
And people have put it
on their golf carts, and-
- Do people really heat
up that much in golf?
- They do.
- Not to be disparaging of the golfers,
but the way I conceptualize golf,
it's like a swing and then a walk
and then a cart ride and then a meal.
I probably just offended
all the golfers out there.
- Well, one time we were doing work
for the Department of Defense.
And they wanted to check it out,
whether or not what we were
doing was really worthwhile.
So they sent out a team of
special ops soldiers to be
our subjects and test it out.
They were here for a week.
So they that was a fun week.
- Yeah, I do some work with those guys.
They're hard driving guys.
They also know how to have fun.
But yeah, they definitely have,
if they have an off or a quit switch,
it's buried deep within
their nervous system.
They don't like to hit that quit switch.
- So the guy who wrote the final report,
he gave an addendum to the
report and he said, "Well,
I'll tell you this.
After I've gotten home,
it's added that technology,"
they took the technology with them.
They wanted to keep it.
- Oh, Yeah.
That sounds about right.
- And using it, it has added 20 yards
to every club in my bag.
And that's no effin' small deal.
- Wow, so it's allowing
people to hit further,
hit their golf ball further?
- Right. [chuckles]
- Interesting. All right.
So for the golf players out there,
that's the reward you get back from Craig
for all my little knocks on golf.
I don't have any knock on golf.
I just don't think about it
as a sport where heating up
is a limiting factor.
So since they're getting
more out of their drive,
what do you think's going on there?
- Well, they can be heating up.
- And they wear gloves, right?
- They're wearing glove on
a hot day, and so forth.
But let me just tell you
one more serious story
about golfers and that is individuals
with multiple sclerosis
are exceedingly temperature-sensitive.
- I didn't know that.
- So they may still be mobile,
but they have to stay in cool locations
and not increase their
exercise to any great extent.
But we've had subjects
with multiple sclerosis
who have just essentially put the device
on their golf cart and
they're back out playing golf
in the middle of the summer.
- Oh, that's great.
- Yeah.
- That's great.
Anything that allows people
to have normal levels of
livelihood and recreation is great.
We always think about performance
at these kinds of like
peak and elite levels
and pushing harder, but yeah,
anything that allows people
to be mobile and functional is great.
So what's your favorite
example of endurance,
and feel free to give us the extreme one
and then we'll talk about averages
to make sure we're thorough
about averages versus exceptions.
- Right. We haven't
done a lot in the field.
I mean outdoors.
Most of our endurance
has been in a hot room
with treadmill work, and so forth.
So the very first experiment we had,
I think, maybe 18 subjects
just off the street.
Maybe we just recruited
people in the hallways,
come on in and do this.
And what we found is we could,
for this group with one trial
with and without cooling,
we could double their endurance,
walking on the treadmill,
walking uphill on the
treadmill in the heat,
like maybe 40 degrees ambient temperature,
40 degrees centigrade.
- So what does the experiment look like?
You're having people walk on
an incline. It's really warm.
Some people are just going to
hit the quit button and say,
I've had enough and get off the treadmill
with proper cooling.
When are they doing the cooling?
- They're doing it continuously.
- I see.
- Because in the laboratory,
we can suspend devices from
the ceiling, for example.
Now we do have prototype wearable devices.
We did them in response to
emails from Ebola workers
a number of years ago in Sierra Leone.
They said, "We've read about
your work with athletes.
Can't you do something for us?
I mean, we're in the
personal protective gear,
and we can't be in the
hot zone for more than 15
or 20 minutes."
So that was started us on the challenge
of developing wearable systems
that could go under the PPE.
We've published that work now, but-.
- That's great, and I'm guessing
the military special operators
that are out in the desert
and other locations are probably excited
about this technology.
- Well, once they get it.
- Once they get.
It's coming, it's coming.
Yeah, I think some people might wonder,
if there are all these studies
and there are these incredible
results over the years
on why haven't we heard more about it?
And I will ask your
opinion on that as well.
But I'll just editorialize a little bit.
Is that the best laboratory work
in its practical applications
oftentimes requires many studies.
And oftentimes there isn't
a portal, so to speak,
to get that information out
into the technology sector.
So there is a company that's
developing this technology
for people to use, to purchase and use.
You might as well just tell us now,
what is the name of that company?
And do they have a website?
People are going to want to know
where can they get this
magical technology?
And is there a poor man's
version of it as well?
- Well, the company is
Arteria, A-R-T-E-R-I-A,
and the website is www.coolmitt.com.
So CoolMitt is just
C-O-O-L-M-I-T-T. coolmitt.com
- It's a great website.
When I went there, it says that right now,
the technology is only available
to professional sports teams and military.
Is that true?
- Well, where we stand now
is the new version of the technology
is sort of in beta test versions.
We got it into the hands of people
who had used the technology before.
So there's NFL teams that are using.
There's college teams. There's Olympics.
There's the Navy SEALs,
Major League Baseball, the NBA,
the National Tennis Association.
They have locations where
now they are trying this out
and reporting back, how's it working?
How could you change it?
How could you improve it? And so forth.
So that's where we are.
But on the website,
you can actually sign up for
being one who will be able
to get one [chuckles]
when they are finally manufactured.
They're now being made
in fairly small lots,
because you want to change
things as you realize how
it can be improved.
- Yeah. This is Stanford after all.
You want to get the technology right.
I like to joke that one of
the reasons I like being
at Stanford so much is that,
not only are my colleagues amazing
and they're so forward thinking,
but they're all perfectionists.
And so that the perfectionist mindset
is it has to be perfect before
it can go live, so to speak.
Well, I think there will
be a lot of interest.
Let's talk about the technology in
a little more detail for a moment.
And then let's talk about
whether or not cruder forms
of that technology exist
either for sake of safety
and/or performance.
So what is, the CoolMitt,
as I understand is
it's a mitt, it's a glove.
You put your hand into,
you hold on to a surface.
And that surface cools your hand
and thereby through
this specialized portal,
cools your core body temperature
and all the muscles of the body.
Subjectively, if I were
to do this right now,
would I think that it was ice cold
or would I think it was just cool?
- Just cool.
- I see.
- Ice cold is too cold.
So people always ask, well,
why can't you just stick your
hand in a bucket of ice water?
It's too cold.
What that does is that causes reflex,
a vasoconstriction of the very
portals that you're trying
to maximize the heat loss from.
So you stick your hand in cold water,
and when it comes out, it's cold.
- You just sealed up all the heat
in your body.
- Yeah.
Right, so what I sort of recommended
to someone at one point,
they said, "Well, when I'm running,
can't I just carry a frozen juice can,
and it will gradually melt?"
And I said, "Well, no,
because that's going to
decrease the heat loss
from that hand.
But if every couple
minutes you switched hands,
[chuckles] it might work.
- Well, I have a feeling that there
are people now doing that
as well as trying this.
So how long, in the CoolMitt
at the proper temperature,
how long are people putting
their hands into the Mitt?
- We, once again, had just
standardized them three minutes.
And part of the reason for that is that
the rate of heat loss is
an exponentially declining curve, okay?
And three minutes sort of gets
the best part of the curve.
So you can go longer and get more benefit,
but the biggest bang for the buck
is in the first two, three minutes.
- Okay, you mentioned a number
of impressive organizations,
sports teams, and military
that are using this.
This is not something that I typically see
on the sidelines of games.
Although to be honest, I
haven't looked very carefully.
I'm guessing that they
are probably keeping
the technology somewhat under wraps.
Where, and how are they doing this?
Are they running back to the locker room?
I mean, the military special operators
are doing their thing,
but in terms of the athletes,
is it possible, hypothetically,
that athletes are doing
this somewhat incognito?
- It's possible, but I really don't know.
People have mentioned here at Stanford,
they don't see the football team using it.
Well, the football team here at Stanford
is mostly playing in cold
weather, cool weather.
The night games are cool.
Even day games are not
very hot frequently here.
But when they go to a hot
place like Arizona or Utah,
at least our coach,
Shaw, says that they take it with them
and that's when they find the benefit.
That's when they use it.
- Interesting, so is
there a poor person's,
poor man or woman's version of this?
You mentioned the juice
can passing back and forth.
You mentioned cooling the hands.
A number of people said
to me after learning
a little bit about this
science and technology
that they've experienced some big effects,
positive effects of cooling by,
and I confess, I've done this,
taking a package of frozen blueberries,
and just kind of passing it back
and forth between my hands.
Now talking to you,
I realize I probably
didn't do it long enough.
I probably was,
I was only doing maybe 30
seconds passing it back
and forth between my hands
and then going back into sets.
I did see a performance
enhancing effect. Absolutely.
But I realized I probably
wasn't optimizing the protocol.
If you were going to give
a crude protocol for it,
let's just say for the gym,
because with running,
it's a little bit tricky,
but what would that look like
if people wanted to just play with this
in some sort of fashion?
- Well, it would be experimental.
- Sure. Yeah, none of
that is very controlled.
- Your idea of frozen peas is a good idea.
And I think since there's
been no actual study of that,
it would have to be you working out
what is the best for you.
But one way to figure it out is that if,
after you hold the cold peas in one hand
and you switch it to the other hand,
if someone then comes in, feels your hand,
is it warm or cold?
If it's cold, it means
you vasoconstricted.
If it's warm, it means the hot
blood is still going there.
Okay. So we do that in the lab.
- And the key is for it
to not vasoconstrict?
- Right.
- Okay.
So there's a test out there, folks.
If you're going to try this
in kind of a crude fashion,
at least until
the CoolMitt is available more broadly
to the general public,
you want to assess whether or not
your palms actually feel cool
to the touch by somebody else.
And if it does,
that means you've essentially
shut down the portal.
You're sealing in more heat, which is bad.
What about putting this
cold pack of some sort
on the face or-
- Or the feet?
I work out at home.
I don't often work out barefooted,
but I suppose I could,
like they did in the 70s.
When those guys were
walking around without shoes
and squatting without
any shoes or socks on.
Could I put my feet on them?
- You could.
If you simply had a water-profused pad
and you were circulating
cool water through it,
you could just put your feet on it, okay?
Part of the problem is
that you don't want,
if, let's say you have just
a cold pack of something.
The problem is back to
boundary layers again.
If you don't have a convective
stream of the cooling medium,
the heat sink is not as effective,
because there'll be a
boundary layer developed
between the heat sink
material and your skin.
So that decreases its efficacy.
- I see, maybe we should
just for a moment,
talk about convection,
radiation, and convection,
and just make that clear.
Like if I put my hands,
let's say it's a cold
night and I'm at a campfire
and I take my hands and I
put them out to the fire-
- You're getting radiation.
- Right.
- Okay.
- And then if it's a windy warm night, no,
I don't know if that's the best example.
Give us a good example of convection.
- Convection, sure, is in a cool breeze.
The wind chill factor. That's
due to convection, okay?
But in terms of heat
transfer between two objects,
if you have convection of the medium,
whether it's blood on the
inside and water on the outside,
you increase the heat exchange
if you have conviction on both sides.
- Right, so this is why
just planting my feet
on two packages of froze,
my bare feet on two
packages of frozen peas,
there's really no opportunity
for circulation of,
and therefore heat transfer.
So it's not really optimal, which, and I-
- But once again,
it depends on the surface area
to get any benefit at all.
We have a study that we published,
which was investigating
the standard treatment
for hyperthermia in the field.
And the standard treatment,
as recommended by medical organizations,
is you take cold packs and you put them
in the axilla, the groin.
- The axilla or the armpit.
- The armpits, the groin, which is-
- Thin-skinned, lots of vasculature.
- Right, and the neck.
So what we did is we did studies
in which we made people hyperthermic.
And then we measured the rate
at which we cool call them
by putting those positions
in those heat exchange bags,
in the recommended location
versus on the glabrous skin
versus palms, soles, and face.
The cooling rate was double.
- Wow.
- And we put the same ice packs,
the same cold packs on the heat portals,
rather than the axilla,
the groin and the face.
- Wow.
- Or the neck.
- Wow, so face, hands and bottoms of feet
will cool you twice as
fast as putting cold packs
into your armpits, your
groin, or back of neck?
- So I like to give the analogy of
if your car is overheating, okay?
And you have a hose, a garden hose,
where should you spray
your cooling system?
Should you spray the
radiator or should you spray
the tubes going in and
out of the radiator?
Well, the rationale with
putting these cold packs
in the axilla, the groin, and the neck,
is that you're getting close
to the major arteries, okay?
Sure. That's going to be effective.
But it's much more effective
if you actually increase
the heat loss capacity
of the radiating surface, the radiators.
- So you cool the hot stuff
heading toward the core?
- That's essentially what
the standard operating procedure is.
That you hit the arteries.
- Amazing.
- And the veins.
Arteries and veins.
- I'm going to just tell a
brief story that illustrates
how almost everybody
gets this stuff wrong.
And I'm going to use
that as an opportunity
to ask you about heating,
deliberate heating,
as opposed to deliberate cooling.
So about four months ago,
a friend of mine, incidentally,
a guy who did nine
years in the SEAL Teams,
really skilled cold water swimmer.
We went out for a swim in the morning.
I'm not nearly even close to the being
in the same universe of
his output potential.
We do these swims. I'm familiar with them.
I got enough blubber on
me that I stay warm enough
in the cold Pacific, no wetsuits.
We do the morning cold swim
for about a mile or so.
And we brought with us up a
young kid that I know real well
that hangs out with us
sometimes and trains with us
who's got very little body fat.
He's just exceptionally lean,
despite eating everything in sight, right?
Teenager, great athlete,
great kid, great swimmer.
So we're out there swimming
and at some point we're talking to him
and it's clear that he's gone hypothermic.
He's slurring his words.
He's not doing well. So
we get him onto the beach.
His teeth are turning
yellow. He's quaking.
His saliva is taken on that
consistency that's clear,
like he's hypothermic.
We go to the lifeguard station.
Lifeguard says, "Okay,
let's get his vitals.
Let's do all this."
Meanwhile, trying stand next to him,
and heat him up by heating up his torso.
So there we are, pressing
against this guy, our friend,
trying to heat him up.
They get a blanket on him.
I'm realizing he was barefoot.
His face was exposed.
Although we did cover his
head with the blanket.
And he eventually came back.
We got some warm liquids
into him and he was okay.
He was fine.
I don't know whether his mother's
ever going to let him swim with us again.
If I ever disappear and go missing,
it's because of that incident.
Anyway, he did great.
He recovered. He's back in
the water and doing well.
But I realized that pretty
much everything from the point
where we got back on the
beach until he was back
to normal, we did incorrectly.
We heated his torso.
We left his extremities exposed.
And we assumed we were
doing the right thing.
And the lifeguard is a skilled lifeguard
at a major public beach.
So I guess the simple question is,
did we get everything wrong?
Did we get anything right?
And what would have been the better option
to heat up a hypothermic person in that,
or similar situation?
- Well, it's interesting you asked that,
because that is the way we got
into this area of investigation.
I worked on how the hypothalamus
regulates body temperature,
neurophysiology.
And one day we were having a
discussion with a colleague
in the department of anesthesia.
And he jokingly said to my
colleague, he said, "Yeah,
you guys think you know
so much about temperature.
I bet you couldn't solve a problem we have
in the recovery room."
What's that?
Well, the patient's come out of surgery.
They're hypothermic and it takes us hours
to get them to stop shivering.
What do they do in the recovery room?
Exactly what you suggested.
They put on warm blankets,
they put on heat lamps,
and it takes them an hour or
two hours to get these patients
to stop shivering, to bring them back up.
So we said, "Ah, it's a trivial problem."
No. It's a hard problem.
It's a hard problem,
because when you're under
anesthesia, you're vasodilated.
When you come out of anesthesia,
you're hypothermic and you vasoconstrict,
and that makes it very difficult
to get heat into the body.
So we got the idea that, well,
if we could just take one
appendage, like an arm,
and we put it in a environment wrapped
in a heating pad and a negative pressure,
suction, that would pull
more blood into that limb,
that blood would get heated
and it would warm the body up faster.
So my colleague built a prototype device.
You couldn't get such a device
into the hospital these days.
[Craig laughs]
But we were with our
anesthesiologist friend,
we took it into the recovery room.
And the first thing that
patient said, "No way,
you're not going to put
that on my patient."
But he prevailed and first
patient didn't shiver at all,
First patient was back
to normal temperature,
core temperature in, I
think, it was eight minutes.
- Amazing.
- Eight or nine minutes.
- Is this now standard practice
in hospitals?
- No. No, no.
- So this is another example where,
I don't get upset about the,
although it's upsetting
to know that it's not,
but I think that it's
yet another case where
a fundamental problem exists.
There's a science-based
solution that makes sense
at the level of physiology,
engineering and practice,
and yet it's not being done.
- [Craig] Right.
- And, I mean,
that's a whole other discussion as to
what the limitations are.
Well, perhaps in,
and I know a number of our listeners are
in the healthcare and medical profession,
as well as military, athletes,
and just also standard
other types of jobs,
civilians doing other types of work.
It would be wonderful if
people understood this.
So once again,
is there a homegrown technology
that people could use?
If somebody is hypothermic,
what is going to be the best
way for them to warm up?
Is it going to be holding
a nice warm mug of cocoa
or something like that?
But not too hot, I
guess, is again the idea.
- Yeah, well, actually you can go hotter
on the glabrous skin.
- Oh, because it'll dilate?
- Because it takes the
heat away faster, okay?
But back to the anesthesia,
what you can do is you can use warm pads.
They have them in all hospitals,
they have circulating
water, perfused pads.
- Hot water bottle type stuff.
- Put them on the feet.
Put them on the feet.
- So typically they'll
slide them under your lower
back or something like that?
- Yeah, put them on the feet.
Okay, sure. That will do it.
But it turns out that we
discovered through this work
that it had nothing to
do with the whole arm.
It was only the hand.
And that's when we came to the realization
of these special blood vessels.
We didn't discover the blood vessels
that are described in "Grey's Anatomy,"
but nobody knew what they were for.
- And you mentioned bears earlier
and other hairy animals.
Do they have
these AVAs as well?
- Oh, yeah.
- And I suppose we haven't defined AVAs.
We've been pretty good about
the no acronyms rule. AVAs is?
- Arteriovenous anastomosis.
So a connection between the
arteries and the veins. Yeah.
- I actually used this technology.
I have a bulldog, bulldog mastiff.
He has a very high
propensity for overheating,
because they're terrible at dumping heat.
And bulldogs are great
at pushing themselves
to the point of exhaustion or death.
It happens, and so now we do
what we call palmar cooling.
Sorry, I couldn't help myself.
Where I'll take Costello
and lower him into
a cool body of water.
Just the bottoms of his paws,
although I think animals
instinctually know
to do this and will go and
stand in bodies of water.
They don't often lie down
all the way. Some do.
But they seem to know that's a great way
to cool themselves off.
- Yeah. Oh, absolutely, yeah.
- And they get the advantage
that their palms and
their feet are essentially
the same thing.
- We actually built devices for dogs.
Did you really?
- And tried them on.
I did a lot of sled dogs
and it worked beautifully.
They had little backpacks
with the equipment and pads
on all their feet and
it worked beautifully.
- Amazing, amazing, along
the lines of heating,
deliberate heating, wearing a knit cap
is something that you see more
of that on the East Coast:
people run around Boston and New England
with a knit cap.
I've always done that
at the start of my runs to
try and warm up more quickly.
And then I take it off.
I shed layers as I go.
Is that a rational practice?
The way I just described it?
- Oh, sure.
Yeah.
- Yeah?
'Cause warming up is important too.
There's a certain amount
of quote/unquote warming up
that's required to lubricate joints
or at least to get the sense
that joints are lubricated
and to be able to move more easily.
- Yeah.
- Do you still recommend
that people warm up?
- Yeah, but I think we're
misled by the term warm up
as if the major purpose
is to raise temperature.
I'm not aware of any data on this,
but I do think that the major contribution
is increasing flexibility.
So you're going to avoid
having damage of joints
and tendons and ligaments and so forth.
But also the ability of the mitochondria
to produce energy can be
impaired at lower temperatures.
And you have to keep in mind
that we say our body
temperature's 37 degrees,
but that's not true.
- Yeah. It varies across the day.
- Well, it varies in parts of your body.
I mean, my hands and arms are
not at 37 degrees right now.
They're much lower, okay? [chuckles]
- So that raises an interesting question.
What is the best way to
measure core body temperature?
- Well, the best core temperature is that,
what we use is esophageal.
So we put a thermocouple
up the nose about two feet
down the esophagus.
So that is about the level of your heart.
- Not gym or home-practical, although-
- No.
- I don't know.
Some of those COVID swab
tests go pretty far.
I can't even imagine going any further.
I felt like my brain was getting tickled.
- The tympanic is pretty good.
- So the ear?
- The ear.
It's not foolproof because you have
to actually have it aimed
properly at the tympanum
and frequently what you're getting
is you're getting sort of a mixture
of tympanic plus ear canal temperature.
- And for those listening
and for those watching,
the tympanic is not going to be the pinna,
this part of the ear, the
outer part of the ear.
The tympanic is going to heading
towards the tympanic membrane.
And yes, I'm sticking my finger in my ear,
because that's where the
laser would actually have
to go to measure your temperature.
- Right.
- So when we're walking into restaurants
and other places nowadays,
and they're shining the
laser at our forehead,
that's probably giving
a pretty crude readout of temperature.
- It is, but there's much less insulation
between your brain and your forehead skin
than there is between your
biceps and your arm skin.
So if you're going to measure
a surface temperature,
that's where you would do it.
And we do temperatures in the infrared.
We take infrared videos of athletes
and our subjects.
And of course the face lights up.
- Okay, so if we're not,
I imagine there's going to
be a technology coming soon
where you can point your smartwatch
or your smartphone at yourself,
and you're going to get a heat map.
- Right, right.
- If somebody out there
hasn't already invented this
for the typical folks outside military,
somebody please invent that,
because I think there's growing interest
in temperature based on
the work that you're doing.
And also for sake of something
I do want to touch on,
which is sleep and metabolism.
Although we don't want to open
up those portals all the way,
because we'd need
several days to cover it.
Okay, so putting on the cap,
what about some of the helmets and gloves
that are used in typical sports?
Do you think that those
can be improved in order
to improve performance in terms
of their ventilation ability
or keeping palmar surfaces
open for instance?
- Well, you mentioned about
the knit cap in cold weather,
especially, and that is significant,
because you do lose a lot
of heat from your head,
but it's a constant heat loss.
It's not variable like your glabrous skin.
So if you decrease that heat loss,
you're going to be warmer.
So, sure. That has an impact.
Now in terms of helmets,
they should be ventilated.
I mean, they should have enough space
in them and holes in them
so that air can circulate.
You don't want to insulate,
thermally insulate your scalp.
That's going to decrease
heat loss quite considerable.
Just for a resting individual,
the brain is about 20% of your metabolism.
So that's a lot of heat production.
- Yeah, absolutely, I
realized there was a question
that I failed to ask earlier
that is burning in my mind now.
And I think is likely burning in the minds
of some of the listeners, which is,
so if you do this cooling
in between sets in the gym,
you get this performance enhancing effect.
You don't get the delayed
onset muscle soreness,
which is great.
So presumably the body is adapting.
You're getting better as a
consequence of being able
to do more work per unit
time or to go harder
in some way of course.
You get that adaptation.
Does that mean that you see a
performance-enhancing effect,
even when you don't cool,
if you've previously done
the cooling workouts?
So for instance, let's say
I can do 10 sets of 10 dips,
which I like to think I can.
But maybe I need to go try.
I dunno if I've done that recently.
I do the cooling.
I cool for three minutes between sets.
And let's say I get to the
point where I can do 20
for 10 sets, 10 sets of 20 repetitions.
And then I don't cool.
Will I be able to match
or approximate my new, better performance?
- You keep your gains. It's
a true conditioning effect.
You respond to the increased work volume
by all of those mechanisms you mentioned.
- [Andrew] Amazing.
- You increase the number
of contractual elements
in your muscles.
- Amazing.
- The muscles get bigger.
- We had an experiment that involved some
of our female students.
Not athletes, but just regular,
they were freshmen actually.
And the experiment was 10 sets of pushups
to muscle failure with or without cooling.
- Same regimen, three minutes of cooling
in between sets of pushups?
- Right.
- Okay.
- Some of those young ladies
reached over 800 pushups.
- Now the total duration of the workout
could be getting much
longer as a consequence
of doing more work.
- No.
- No, it doesn't take you longer.
Well, minor, I mean, a
push-up is pretty fast.
- Yeah. It's pretty fast.
- Yeah.
So you do 10 sets, the
maximum 45 minutes total.
The most-
- That's a lot of pushups.
- Yep.
- And so the interesting
thing is they came in one day
and they said, "Dr. Heller,
you cost us a lot of money."
"Why?" "Well, we had a
formal dance this weekend.
We all had to buy new sleeveless dresses."
- Nice.
[Craig laughs]
It's a good problem to
have. Good problem to have.
Let's talk about steroids,
anabolic steroids.
We're heading into an Olympics.
Every time the Olympics rolls around,
you hear about these cases
of people getting popped,
as they call it, or caught
for anabolic steroids.
There are some accusations out there.
Now they'll be out more.
This'll get handled in the press
and in the various organizations.
Clearly athletes and non-athletes
use anabolic steroids.
And typically anabolic steroids are
of the testosterone variety.
There are derivatives, et cetera.
And those derivatives do different things
in the anabolic versus
androgenic, et cetera.
But typically the idea is,
at least as I understand it,
in talking to some of these individuals,
is that they allow people to train more,
because they recover faster.
They are able to synthesize more protein,
because they're basically
getting a second puberty,
because as we all know during puberty,
there's a lot of growth of the body.
And of course there are a lot
of negative effects of abuse
of these things and they are banned
from various sports organizations,
especially, I should
mention, in combat sports,
it's especially concerning,
because in combat sports,
a performance enhancement means
that you can harm somebody
more than you would be able to otherwise
as opposed to in other sorts of sports.
Just to conceptualize it.
And I'm not taking a moral
stance on any of this.
I just want to ask you,
when you compare palmar
cooling to anabolic steroids
in terms of gym performance,
what do you see?
- Well, we do not do research
on steroids, [chuckles]
but there is a lot of
research in the literature.
A lot of that research in
the strength conditioning
magazines is not very scientific.
- No.
- Okay?
- Or it might not even
be scientific at all.
- Right.
- But we did do an analysis
of reputable papers
and we did find, I think it
was probably eight or nine,
10 studies on bench press,
increase in bench press performance
on steroids or not, okay?
- These were males or females?
- Well, these were all males,
but I'll get back to the females, okay?
The bottom line is that in all
of these independent studies,
their rate of improvement was
approximately 1% per week.
- Okay.
- Okay?
Now I've just told you about studies
in which we've had 300%
increase in a month.
[Craig chuckles]
So.
- It's an enormous, enormous difference.
- So why would you endanger your health
as well as your legal ability
to compete with such an ineffective tool?
- Yeah, no, I think it's the notion
of performance enhancement
is a really interesting one,
because people clearly pay
attention to nutrition.
Sleep is now something
that I think everybody,
but especially athletes
are paying attention to.
- Right.
- And I predict that
temperature will be one
of the more powerful parameters
that people are going
to be focusing on.
- Yeah. That's true.
- Because of the magnitude of the effects
that you're describing
and also because so
much of the variability
around performance, as you mentioned,
has to do with when you
go to a new environment,
everyone has their home
environment worked out pretty well.
Sleep well in your own bed at home.
When you can control everything,
your performance is always great.
This is why I think
military special operators
are particularly interesting group,
because their whole world
is centered around elite
and high performance with very high risk,
high consequence under
variable conditions.
The essence of their work
is variable unpredictable conditions.
So you mentioned female
athletes and steroids.
I'm curious about this.
- Yeah, because everybody
has always said to us, well,
you only use male subjects
and obviously they have this
testosterone background.
They have higher levels of testosterone.
That's why you get these results.
So we did a comparative study on females.
We get the same results.
- Impressive, and these are
Stanford athletes or also-
- No, these were not Stanford athlete,
they were Stanford students.
But not athletes.
Well, we have done, of
course, work on some athletes.
But in general, we don't
do research on our teams,
our varsity teams.
So they have their own protocols.
They have their own training program.
- Yeah. They don't like us
to get too close to them.
I work with some of these
folks in the coaches
and they are very skeptical,
with good reason also.
And the reason I ask is that
when you see these Pac-10 or
Division I college athletes,
and then you see their peers,
there's clearly a difference, right?
I mean, they are pedigreed
at throughout, right?
And more typical folks
also have different goals.
They may not want to
get infinitely stronger
or perform more endurance work.
So I want to ask you a couple of things
about shivering and metabolism,
'cause I think they're very interesting
and sufficiently related.
So my understanding is that shiver
is an adaptation that's
designed to heat us up.
- Yes.
- That we have brown fat
that's in compartments
around our body that
are activated by shiver
or co-activated by shiver.
And that shivering is useful
for increasing metabolism.
Is that true? And does it require
that cold be the stimulus?
So two scenarios. I'll
give you an experiment.
I put someone into cold
water of some sort,
and then I make them get out
or I have them stand near it,
and then they start shivering.
My understanding is that their
metabolism will increase.
What if I take someone and
I just have them shiver,
but they're not exposed by cold,
it's kind of a deliberate shivering.
Will that also create a
substantial increase in metabolism?
- Sure, so deliberate
shivering without cold
is essentially what happens
when you get a fever.
Your set point goes up
in your hypothalamus
and you actually,
even though you're a
normal body temperature,
your thermostat is telling
you you're too cold,
increase your metabolism.
So shiver, right?
So, sure, shivering is a good
way of increasing metabolism,
but it only can take
metabolism up maybe three
or four times resting.
- Okay, but it seems like-
- Whereas exercise can
take you up 10 times.
- Got it. All right.
I'm going to ask a couple
of more random questions
and seemingly random.
Do bears actually hibernate?
- Oh, yeah.
- The true hibernation?
- Well, it depends on how you define true.
A bear, actually, we've
done a lot of work on bears.
[Craig chuckles]
- Do you also put the
nose thermal couple down
in the esophagus?
- We implant them surgically.
- They're anesthetized
when you implant them?
- Yes.
- Khat kind of bears are these?
- Black bears.
- Okay.
- And did this with colleagues
at University of Alaska.
And we're analyzing the data now,
but what we've done is
we've had now a total of 18
bears and we implant them
with EEG, EKG, temperature sensors,
and sometimes we actually
measure their oxygen consumption.
- These are bears in the wild?
- These are bears in the wild,
but they're brought in
to University of Alaska
where we keep them in
an outdoor enclosure.
So they're hibernating in
a nest box in an enclosure,
and we're recording this
electrophysiological data
continuously for six months.
- Amazing. How do I get on this protocol?
[Craig chuckles]
[Andrew chuckling]
Craig and I are doing some
work together going forward.
And maybe you can slide me
onto this protocol too, it sounds amazing.
- Right now, it's a matter of
just analyzing the gigabytes,
terabytes of data that
have been collected.
But anyway, you asked about hibernation.
So bears only go down to about 33,
34 degrees centigrade in core temperature.
And that's been argued that, well,
they can't go lower because
they have so much insulation.
They're so big, their surface
volume ratio, and so forth,
and that's not true.
They shiver, so if we have
a day like a minus 40,
which you get up in Alaska,
they will go through periods of shivering.
And maintain a core temperature on 33-34.
Now the ground squirrels and the marmots,
which are smaller animals,
they will drop down to a body temperature
maybe within a degree of the environment.
So they can go down to one
or two degrees centigrade
just above freezing during
bouts of hibernation.
So they'll stay in hibernation
for seven or eight days
and they'll come back up
to normal body temperature
for a day, then they'll go back down,
and do another about-
- What do they do during
that day when they're warming up again?
Do go around-
- They rearrange their nests,
eat, if they've stored food.
Some species store lots of food.
Others just depend on their fat.
- A former mentor of mine,
my master's degree mentor,
and a colleague and friend
of yours, Irving Zucker
at UC Berkeley told me a story once,
told me a lot of stories,
he tells great stories,
as you know.
He told me that when an animal comes out
of hibernation periodically,
that it's a very dramatic
thing to observe.
That it's not like they wake up
and yawn and look around,
but it's like a complete
epileptic seizure.
- Right.
- What what's going on?
- Shiver.
- It's just a very traumatic shiver.
- So at the low temperatures,
they cannot shiver because
the effect of temperature
on the conduction of the
nerves and the muscle fiber.
- So they're shut down basically?
- They're shut down.
So there they use brown fat.
So they activate brown fat
and then when they get up to
a temperature of maybe 15,
16 degrees centigrade,
then the shivering starts and
it gets very, very violent,
but they're still asleep.
- Do we shiver in our sleep?
- I would imagine we do,
but it probably wakes us up.
- Interesting, So the brown
fat is kind of like kindling?
- The brown fat is a tissue
which has lots of stored
energy, 'cause it's fat,
but unlike our white fat, our regular fat,
it also has lots of
these little powerhouses,
mitochondria, and lots of blood supply.
So essentially it is a
tissue just to produce heat.
That's what it's there for.
Now in these hibernators,
there are big patches of
brown fat at certain locations
that are critical, like
around the heart, for example.
For us, the brown fat
is sort of distributed.
So for many, many years,
it was thought humans
don't have brown fat,
but indeed we do.
It's just not localized
into discrete fat pads,
like it is in ground squirrels, marmots.
- I don't know why the phrase
fat pads is so satisfying
to say, but it is fat pads.
Speaking of fat pads,
I was taught that we have,
by the internet, I should say,
I was taught by the internet
that we have brown fat
between our scapulae and our upper neck.
Is that truly a source of
brown enrichment for brown fat?
- If you're a ground squirrel.
[Andrew scoffs]
- So this is all the drawings out there?
Okay, so what I'm hearing
you say is that brown fat
is actually distributed in patch-
- In humans, it's distributed
along with other fat tissue.
It's not as discreet.
- So the reason I'm kind of shocked
and amused and troubled by this is
because there is a
somewhat standard protocol
in the performance,
wellness, whatever world,
whatever you want to call it,
of putting ice packs on
the upper back as a way
to stimulate brown fat thermogenesis.
I'm hearing some inhales of concern
from the physiologist.
So tell me why,
it sounds like that's
probably not the best way
to stimulate brown fat activation.
- Well, let's put it this way-
You're not attacking anyone specifically,
because the whole little believes this.
- But it may not be
totally facetiae or false.
Think of what that's doing.
If you put ice right there
where your spinal cord
is close to the surface,
that's where you're going to
hit the vertebral arteries.
So you're essentially putting
a cold source into the brain,
to the hypothalamus.
The hypothalamus is you're too cold.
So it is going to turn on
shivering and brown fat so.
- Would there be a better site
for sake of activating brown fat?
Palmar cooling?
- I can't say because the
activation of brown fat
is a sympathetic nervous system response.
So any lowering of core temperature
that will let the thermostat
say you're too cold
is going to turn on sympathetic.
Now people will have perhaps
different amounts of brown fat.
So newborn have more
brown fat than adults.
- 'Cause the newborns
can't shiver. Correct?
- I don't know.
- Okay.
That's what I read.
I don't know if that's true.
I read that in what I believe
to be credible sources.
- Yeah, it could be.
I just don't know, it depends
on if it's really newborn,
I can agree because you don't have all
of the motor pathways connected up yet.
That's something that
occurs in early days of life
and is probably one of the
functions of REM sleep,
which infants have a lot of.
- Right.
- Okay.
But how to activate brown fat
if you are consistently exposed to cold?
So if you live in the Arctic
and you go out jogging
in the winter,
maybe that will increase the
amount of brown fat you have.
If you live in the tropics,
maybe you have less brown fat.
I don't know.
I don't know of any studies
which have looked into that.
- Okay. Ice headache.
Sometimes I'll drink a
cold beverage or I'll
eat ice cream in my head will-
- Brain freeze.
And speaking of special
forces, I was talking to,
we all see the images of the SEALs,
SEAL training slash screening in Coronado
where they're going in
and out of the Pacific,
which is very cold.
But I know they also spend some
time in the very cold waters
of Kodiak, Alaska.
You mentioned Alaska.
Brain freeze, so-called ice headache,
is a common occurrence
there in those situations.
But we all have experienced this.
We eat ice cream, and you
get that brain freeze.
I can feel it right now a
little bit subjectively.
I can induce it.
What's going on there?
And I would always just rub my tongue
on the roof of my mouth.
Is there something that I'm
doing that's functional there
just to try and alleviate it?
- Good question, the
thing is that the roof
of your mouth is very
close to your hypothalamus.
So if indeed it's a Popsicle
that's giving you the brain freeze,
it may be a direct cooling
effect from the roof
of your mouth and if you
put your tongue there,
you're insulating the roof of your mouth.
I don't know, I'm guessing.
- But what's the source
of the brain freeze?
It at vasoconstriction?
- It's a vasomotor change.
Whether it's constriction,
I think it's more likely an
increase in blood pressure,
which will essentially cause
an expansion of the arteries
and activate pain receptors.
We don't have pain receptors
in the neural tissue
in the brain.
We have them in the meninges
and predominantly associated
with the blood vessels,
the walls of the blood vessels.
So if you have something
which will dramatically
increase your blood
pressure going to the brain,
you're likely to get...
We've had some preliminary data.
I even hate to mention this,
because we have not been able
to pursue it systematically,
but we've had some experience with people
with migraine that say,
if they use one of our devices to heat,
that the migraine goes away.
And I don't know.
- Yeah. It's very, and a lot
of people suffer from migraine.
I know there are a lot of
different types of migraine.
I've been reading a lot about this lately,
because I get so many
questions about migraine but.
- I'd hate to say anything.
- Sure.
And we'll just underscore
this as preliminary
and people have been
great about understanding
that when we say preliminary,
we mean it has not passed through
the required filters to
call it hard fact yet.
- We don't even have a decent dataset.
These are anecdotal report.
- Yeah, anecdata,
as people like to call it,
but I don't even like
to call it that because
we don't want to give it
more weight than it deserves,
but that's interesting.
The ice headache and the
increase in blood pressure
is interesting because the only thing
that I've heard is similar
to it is something that comes from,
they have these competitions
where people eat
these very hot chili peppers.
It's kind of an ego thing,
I guess, for reasons that escaped me,
that eating really hot peppers.
And every once in a while,
someone will eat one of these and get
what's called thunderclap headache,
where a headache comes on
extremely quickly and so quickly
that it's caused,
so severe rather that it's
been known to cause stroke
and brain damage.
So these very, very hot peppers,
if you're not acclimated to
them, and maybe even if you are,
have been shown to actually
cause brain damage.
Yeah. Some good evidence for this.
I do want to talk about something
that we have not touched
on yet, which is NEAT.
Non-exercise induced thermogenesis, right?
So non-activity associated thermogenesis.
And the fidgeters, right?
So the classic work of
like Rothwell and Stock.
And the idea that some people who overeat
are burning off that energy by way
of shaking their knee
or moving around a lot.
The quote/unquote nervous types.
But they quoted in those studies,
a huge degree of caloric burn,
800, 2500 calories per
day burned above those
who sit rather still.
Does that seem farfetched?
Those are older data but
any comment on NEAT or
non-exercise induced thermogenesis?
- Well, I do think it's
pretty straightforward
that if you increase muscle
activity of any kind,
you're increasing your energy consumption
and your heat production.
And the really extreme example
is hyper and hypothyroidism.
People that are hyperthyroid or fidgety
and they have a high metabolic rate
and they're hot.
And people that are hypothermic are cool.
They don't move very much.
So any kind of muscle activity increases,
and when you say it's not much activity,
but remember it's only 20% effective.
80% of the energy is going to heat.
So it may not exert much energy
to tap your foot. [chuckles]
But four times the amount
of energy that is going
into the movement is being lost as heat.
- That's very interesting.
A couple more quick questions.
There's a lot of excitement these days
or at least usage these days
of so-called energy drinks
or pre-workout drinks.
Many of these contain
thermogenic compounds.
So caffeine, things,
there's a culture now of taking arginine,
things that support arginine.
So beet juice and L-citrulline,
things to dilate the blood vessels.
Sometimes this is for sake
of increasing blood flow
to the muscles during resistance exercise.
But a lot of these are thermogenic,
is to increase body temperature.
And is it possible that
some of these energy drinks
are actually, or similar,
six espresso or whatever it is,
are acting to prevent optimal performance
or reduce performance?
- I don't think that
the temperature rise is
that, I really don't know,
but what it does is it
makes you more jittery
and you're going to increase that NEAT
that you were talking about.
There's another thing.
And that is that when you
are exercising your muscle
and it becomes slightly hypoxic,
I mean the oxygen suppliers is not enough,
the muscle releases adenosine.
And what adenosine does in the muscle
is cause the blood vessels
to open up, to dilate.
So it's a way of increasing
the blood flow to the muscle
and therefore the oxygen
supply to the muscle.
- And caffeine is essentially
an adenosine antagonists.
- An adenosine antagonist. Right.
- So under the strict logic,
ingesting caffeine will
reduce adenosine release
and will reduce oxygen
utilization of the muscle?
- Right.
- So that would lead me to believe that,
motivational support aside,
that caffeine will hinder
muscular performance?
- I would think so,
but I can't give you an
authoritative answer on that.
- Okay, we're just going through the logic
and the gymnastics around that.
I think it's a fascinating
area that deserves attention
because the question
of what one can ingest
in order to perform better,
to say nothing of hormone augmentation,
but often leads back to stimulants.
And if those stimulants,
most of which include
caffeine of some sort,
are inhibiting the adenosine system
and the adenosine system is
supporting the oxygenation
of muscle, then I would
imagine that avoiding them
might be the better option.
- Yeah, I just, I'm not
aware of data that would,
so this is a general phenomenon
of adenosine and blood flow.
It has of course,
a different effect in the brain.
Adenosine causes sleep.
So caffeine keeps you awake.
And if you stay awake,
you're going to have a
higher metabolic rate
than if you go to sleep.
And the thing is you say, energy drinks,
the question is, what really is in them?
- It's usually a cocktail of things.
I don't take these, I
don't like them at all,
but they're usually a
combination of vasodilators,
caffeine, some sort of stimulant.
- And source of glucose usually.
- Sometimes a source of
glucose and sometimes not.
And oftentimes
there are vasodilators and there are
compounds that are thought
to be so-called nootropics,
smart drugs that basically
increase acetylcholine
or norepinephrine transmission.
In the 80s and 90s,
the beta-3 agonist like
clenbuterol were very popular,
but they were all banned.
So those were all banned from,
although people used them recreationally,
which I do not recommend.
There were actually a number of deaths due
to dehydration, overheating,
as well as cardiac effects.
Before we wrap up,
I know you've done a ton of work on sleep.
I think we're going to
have to do another episode
about your work on sleep,
because the amount of data
that you produce there
is vast actually.
So I first got to know
you and your work related
to sleep and temperature.
We all hear nowadays that
it's good to keep the room
that you sleep in cool.
Keep it dark.
I've talked a number of
times on podcast episodes
about the role of light and
shifting circadian rhythms.
I have two questions related to sleep.
One is, are there any things that may
or may not relate to temperature,
but that you think are very
useful for getting better sleep,
that you don't hear that much about,
that people might want to consider or try?
Realizing that there are a lot
of reasons why people don't sleep great,
but what are some things
that you don't hear
that much about these days
that you wish people knew?
- Well, the sleep medicine
community now puts
a lot more emphasis on
cognitive behavioral therapy
than on pharmacology.
So what cognitive behavioral therapy does
is it essentially increases
your sleep hygiene.
So there are certain just general rules.
So have a regular bedtime
and a regular arousal time.
Don't be skipping back
and forth all the time.
- Arousal, you mean wake-up time?
- Wake-up time, yeah.
- Spoken like a true physiologist.
- Right. [laughs]
Yeah, another thing is don't use screens
within a couple hours of bedtime,
because screens are
predominantly rich in blue light.
And what that does, as you
mentioned, the circadian system,
that affects your circadian system.
That pushes off your circadian
stimulus for sleep, okay?
Another thing is of course relax.
I mean, don't work right up until
the time you're going to bed.
Take some time to do something relaxing.
And then temperature,
you've mentioned that.
And for many people, a warm bath
is really conducive to good sleep.
And people are now swearing by
a cooler environment for sleep.
And that makes sense in
terms of the circadian effect
on body temperature.
So our circadian clock is
effecting our thermostat.
So at the time we go to bed,
our thermostat is on its way down
to a lower set point, okay?
So what happens?
You go to bed and you're
feeling a little bit cool.
So you pile on lots of blankets.
And then what happens is you
wake up a little bit later
and you're hot, so you throw them off.
It's because your
thermostat has set downward.
Now why is it better to
have a cooler environment?
It's better to have a cooler environment,
because it's easier to thermoregulate.
So you can go to Europe in the summertime
and the hotel rooms still
have these big comforters,
these down comforters.
So how do you deal with that?
You stick out your hands
and your legs, okay?
- I've always slept with,
I have one leg that just kind
a hangs out of the, yeah.
- But they're your heat
loss surfaces, right?
So if you're in a cool environment,
you can take advantage of that.
You can take advantage by passively
regulating your body temperature.
You don't have to get
up and wake up and say,
oh my God, I've got to change
the covers or blankets,
or what have you.
If you're in a warm
environment, what can you do?
- You need to sleep with
one hand in the CoolMitt.
- Right.
- Right?
And right now that's not available yet.
- Right. It's not available.
- I've never heard about it that way.
I've always heard you want
to sleep in a cool room
or keep the room cold.
- Yeah.
- But I never realized why
that's useful, which is,
you're saying, then you can
move these glabrous surfaces
in and out.
You could even also wake up
under the blanket completely.
- Your face. Yeah, yeah.
- Very, very interesting.
That finally a rational
science grounded explanation
for why we need to sleep in a cool room.
'Cause I always thought, well,
if your temperature is going down anyway,
why do you have to sleep in a cool room?
What about wearing socks while you sleep?
That was big a few years
ago where they said,
you should put socks on.
Now I would think that's
probably the wrong advice.
You probably just-
- Well, I don't know if it's wrong advice.
There's an old, old study
that was supported by,
I think, Eddie Bauer,
the sleeping bag company.
And what the study showed,
what the study was asking is
what are the most temperature-sensitive
spots in the body?
Where do you feel cold?
And what that showed was it was the toes.
- That makes sense.
So when you sample water with your toe,
you always see that.
[Craig laughs]
- So the socks essentially
are promoting thermal comfort
by insulating that area
that's quite sensitive.
Now of course, if it's too warm,
you're not going to put socks on.
- Right, well, Craig, thank you so much.
You gave so much information
that's actionable and interesting.
I know a lot of people are
going to be really interested
in the palmar cooling
technology from CoolMitt.
We will be sure to provide
resources to the website
so that people can register interest.
I do encourage people to play
around with, so to speak,
the palmar cooling
technology that we all have,
which are these glabrous surfaces.
And I also just want to
thank you for taking time out
of your busy schedule to
share this information.
- Yeah, you're welcome.
It was fun. It was lots of fun.
- I certainly learned a lot
and I know a lot of people
are going to learn a lot
that's useful to them.
- Good questions.
- Well, fabulous answers.
Thank you.
- Thank you.
- Thank you for joining for my discussion
with Dr. Craig Heller.
If you're enjoying this
podcast and learning from it,
please subscribe to our
YouTube channel as well.
You can give us feedback in
the comment section on YouTube
as to topics you would like
us to cover, future guests,
and so on.
Also subscribe to the podcast
on Apple and on Spotify.
And on Apple,
you have the opportunity to leave us up
to a five-star review and you can leave us
a comment or feedback there as well.
Please also check out our
sponsors that we mentioned
at the beginning of the podcast.
That's a terrific way
to support our podcast.
In addition, if you're interested
in supporting research in
the Huberman Lab at Stanford,
you can go to
hubermanlab.stanford.edu/giving.
And there you can make a
tax-deductible donation
to support research in
my laboratory on stress,
human performance, sleep and trauma,
and topics of that sort.
If you're not already
following us at Huberman Lab
on Instagram or Twitter,
you're welcome to do so.
On Instagram, I do short
neuroscience tutorials
that are separate from
the tutorials that I tend
to do on the podcast.
Often on this podcast,
we discuss supplements.
One of the really important things,
if you're going to take supplements,
is that the supplements be
of the highest quality ingredients
and that the amount of those ingredients
that's listed on the
label actually matches
what is in those supplements.
We've partnered with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E,
because thorn has the
highest levels of stringency
in terms of quality and
how much of each supplement
they put in their products.
If you'd like to see the
supplements that I take,
you can go to Thorne,
T-H-O-R-N-E.com/the letter U/Huberman.
And there, you can see what I take.
You can get 20% off any
of those supplements
if you enter the Thorne
site through that portal.
And even if you navigate to other products
and other product pages
within the Thorne site,
you can still get that 20% off.
So it's Thorne, thorne.com/u/huberman.
And last, but certainly not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
[energetic rock music]